Let's be real.
We have all been there.
You're filling out some form online
and suddenly it just breaks
and it's more than just a little annoying, right?
It's usually a sign of a really poorly designed system.
So in this explainer, we're gonna break down how
to build way better forms that actually work for everyone.
Think about it. You find the perfect thing online,
you're excited, you're ready to buy.
You head to the checkout, and then you run into the form.
You start typing, something goes wrong
and you just, you give up.
We've all done it. It is so frustrating,
and it usually starts with a useless little message like
this error.
That's it. Just error. What does that even mean?
What did I do wrong? How do I fix it?
Or what about this classic invalid? Invalid what?
My name isn't invalid. My email address is perfectly valid.
Thank you very much. And oh, my personal favorite,
something went wrong.
You think this kind of vague,
completely unhelpful feedback isn't just a minor thing.
It is a symptom of a much, much bigger problem.
And this is the crucial point right here.
A bad form isn't just inconvenient, it's a dead end.
It literally stops people from signing up, from buying,
from connecting with you.
It completely blocks them from using
your product or service.
A poorly designed form, well,
it basically acts like an invisible wall for a lot of us.
It's just really frustrating.
But you know, for someone using assistive technology like a
screen reader or maybe someone with a cognitive disability,
that wall can be totally impossible to get past.
Let's look at one of the most common bricks in that wall.
Okay? You see this all the time.
This is a perfect example of
what we call the placeholder problem.
See how the field has that faint text inside it
that says first name, you click on it, you start to type
and poof, the label is gone.
Now what if you get distracted for a second?
You look back at the screen, what was this field for?
Again, this is exactly why.
Using that placeholder text
as your only label is such a terrible practice.
It vanishes, which means you lose all context.
This forces your brain to work harder trying to remember
what you were supposed to type there,
and it makes it almost impossible to quickly scan
and double check your work before you hit submit.
They just aren't real persistent labels.
So how do we tear down this invisible wall?
Well, the good news is it's not nearly
as complicated as it sounds.
There are really three fundamental keys to unlocking forms
that are accessible and just way more user friendly.
And here they are.
It all comes down to persistent labels, helpful errors,
and smart auto complete.
Seriously. If you get these three things right,
you are well on your way to creating a form
that actually works for everyone.
So let's break 'em down one by one. Okay, first up, labels.
The best way to think about a label is like
a permanent guidepost.
It should always, always be
There telling the user exactly what information they need
to put in that specific field no matter what.
So what makes a label great?
Well, it's always visible and never disappears,
and it's programmatically associated with its input.
Now that sounds super technical, but it's really simple.
It just means the code connects the label
text to the input box.
That way a screen reader can announce email, text input.
That connection is invisible to most of us,
but it is absolutely critical for accessibility.
Alright, next up errors.
We have got to stop thinking of error messages as a way
to shout you failed
and start thinking of them as a helpful hint to say,
Hey, here's how to succeed.
And this slide just shows the difference so perfectly.
On the left, you get invalid email,
which is totally useless,
but look at the right email must include at and a domain.
Ah, okay, now I know exactly what I need to do to fix it.
See, one is a wall, the other is a signpost.
A truly great error message does three simple things.
One, it clearly identifies what went wrong.
Two, it suggests how to fix it.
And three, it uses a clear visual cue,
like an icon in some text, not just a red border
that someone who's colorblind might not even be able to see.
Our third and final key is auto complete.
Now, this is the smart assistant
that makes filling out forms faster
and easier for all of us,
but it's especially vital for users with motor
or cognitive disabilities.
You know that magical moment, right?
When you click on the first line of an address field
and your browser just pops up
and offers to fill in the entire thing for you?
That's not magic. That's just really good design.
So how does that work? Well, behind the scenes, a designer
or developer adds a simple little tag,
something like auto complete equals street address.
This tag tells the browser exactly what kind
of information the field is expecting,
and that allows the browser
or even a password manager to give you
that helpful time saving autofill suggestion.
And here is the real takeaway.
Deciding which fields get an auto complete tag isn't
just some engineering task.
It is a crucial design decision.
It's about you, the creator,
intentionally designing a lower effort,
more accessible experience for your users.
So when you put all three of these keys together,
persistent labels, helpful errors,
and smart auto complete,
you stop building those invisible walls
and instead you start designing inclusive digital doorways.
Ultimately, that's what this is all about, inclusive design.
It's not some niche topic.
It's the core practice
of making sure the digital world is open
and usable for every single person, no matter
what their physical or cognitive abilities are.
So I'll leave you with this question.
The next time you design or build
or even just fill out a form, ask yourself,
is this thing a barrier that's shedding people out
or is it a welcome mat inviting them in?
Thanks for joining us.